= Yauth

Yauth is a extremely simple authentication solution for prototypes, and provides a drop-in solution for http basic authentication.
It uses a yaml file to store usernames and hashed password combined with the http basic authentication. 
The whole gem provides a better-than-nothing security, and it was designed with small prototypes in mind.
It is interally developed as a https://github.com/hassox/warden strategy, the same library on which the popular Devise is based. 

Yauth resolve one well defined problem: protecting a web application that is going to be accessed by a few users.
As adding new users requires manual intervention (only launching a command, see below), it's a good choice for single-users web applications or prototypes. In this way you can password-protect your app easily and expose it to your clients on the web.

== Installation

First, install the gem:

  gem install yauth

Or if you are using Bundler:

  echo "gem 'yauth'" >> Gemfile
  bundle install

Add the first user (username 'bar' and password 'foo'):

  yauth add bar foo

Check the 'config/users.yml' into your version control system:

  git add config/users.yml
  git commit -m "Added user 'bar'."

== Configuration

Yauth requires almost no configuration, 5 lines of code.

=== Sinatra

In your application.rb, simply put:

  Yauth::Strategy.install!
  
  use Warden::Manager do |manager|
    manager.default_strategies :yauth_users
    manager.failure_app = Yauth::FailureApp.new
  end

To require authentication inside an action, simply call:

  get '/' do
    request.env['warden'].authenticate! # execution stop and auth is required
    "hello world\n"
  end

=== Rails 3

In your config/application.rb file put:

  Yauth::Strategy.install!
  
  config.middleware.use Warden::Manager do |manager|
    manager.default_strategies :yauth_users
    manager.failure_app = Yauth::FailureApp.new
  end

To require authentication inside an action, add this method to app/controllers/application_controller.rb:

  private
  def authenticate
    env['warden'].authenticate!
  end

Then, you can use the +authenticate+ method as a before filter for every method that requires authentication:

  before_filter :authenticate, :only => :your_method_here

== Adding and removing users

If you want to add the user 'foo', with password 'bar', just launch:

  yauth add foo bar

Then, if you want to change 'foo' password to 'oof', just launch:

  yauht add foo oof

Finally, to remove 'foo' user:

  yauth rm foo

== Security Considerations

Users are stored in the 'config/users.yml' file, with the password stored as SHA256 hash. 
In this way it's safe to add the 'config/users.yml' to the version control system.

You can see an example of the 'config/users.yml' file:

  --- 
  - user: 
      username: admin
      password: 8c6976e5b5410415bde908bd4dee15dfb167a9c873fc4bb8a81f6f2ab448a918


== TODO

Future versions will include:
* drop-in api key solution, i.e. user might have a key for API prototypation;
* authentication scopes, as defined in warden.

== Contributing to yauth
 
* Check out the latest master to make sure the feature hasn't been implemented or the bug hasn't been fixed yet
* Check out the issue tracker to make sure someone already hasn't requested it and/or contributed it
* Fork the project
* Start a feature/bugfix branch
* Commit and push until you are happy with your contribution
* Make sure to add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a future version unintentionally.
* Please try not to mess with the Rakefile, version, or history. If you want to have your own version, or is otherwise necessary, that is fine, but please isolate to its own commit so I can cherry-pick around it.

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2011 Matteo Collina. See LICENSE.txt for
further details.

